blog post for KEP-3857: Recursive Read-only (RRO) mounts (#45238)
kubernetes/website: content/en/blog/_posts/2024-04-23-recursive-read-only-mounts.md

Reviewer: - Please change the `###` level 3 headings into `##` level 2 headings.

Author: done

---
layout: blog
title: 'Kubernetes 1.30: Read-only volume mounts can be finally literally read-only'
date: 2024-04-23
slug: recursive-read-only-mounts
---

**Author:** Akihiro Suda (NTT)

Read-only volume mounts have been a feature of Kubernetes since the beginning.
Surprisingly, read-only mounts are not completely read-only under certain conditions.
As of the v1.30 release, they can be made completely read-only,

> with alpha support for _recursive read-only mounts_.

Reviewer: Is this a Linux-only thing?

Author: Yes, added "on Linux"

kind: Pod
spec:
  volumes:
    - name: mnt
      hostPath:
        path: /mnt
  containers:
    - volumeMounts:
        - name: mnt
          mountPath: /mnt
          readOnly: true
          # NEW
          # Possible values are `Enabled`, `IfPossible`, and `Disabled`.
          # Needs to be specified in conjunction with `readOnly: true`.
          recursiveReadOnly: Enabled
{{< /highlight >}}

This is implemented by applying the `MOUNT_ATTR_RDONLY` attribute with the `AT_RECURSIVE` flag
using [`mount_setattr(2)`](https://man7.org/linux/man-pages/man2/mount_setattr.2.html) added in
Linux kernel v5.12.

For backwards compatibility, the `recursiveReadOnly` field is not a replacement for `readOnly`,
but is used _in conjunction_ with it.
To get a properly recursive read-only mount, you must set both fields.

## Feature availability {#availability}

To enable `recursiveReadOnly` mounts, the following components have to be used:

* Kubernetes: v1.30 or later, with the `RecursiveReadOnlyMounts`
  [feature gate](/docs/reference/command-line-tools-reference/feature-gates/) enabled.
  As of v1.30, the gate is marked as alpha.

* CRI runtime:
  * containerd: v2.0 or later

* OCI runtime:

>   * runc: v1.1 or later

Reviewer 2: @AkihiroSuda Shouldnt this be mentioned as v1.1.0 or later. While reading the blog post, this got me a little confused.

Author: Isn't it same ?

Reviewer 2: We normally go with <major>.<minor>.<patch> right. Hence the confusion.

Reviewer: > We normally go with `<major>.<minor>.<patch>` right. Hence the confusion.

There are **loads** of places where this website refers to `<major>.<minor>` only, and actually they much outnumber places where we specify things down to a patch version.

IMO, there's nothing to fix.

---
layout: blog
title: 'Kubernetes 1.30: Read-only volume mounts can be finally literally read-only'
date: 2024-04-23
slug: recursive-read-only-mounts
---

**Author:** Akihiro Suda (NTT)

> Kubernetes 1.30 added alpha support for "recursive read-only mounts".

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Kubernetes 1.30 added alpha support for _recursive read-only mounts_.
```

Author: done

> Prior to this release, read-only volume mounts were surprisingly not really read-only under specific conditions.

Reviewer 3: This is a scary statement. I think I would say something like:

"""
Read-only volume mounts have been a feature of Kubernetes since 1.0.  Surprisingly, read-only mounts are not completely read-only under certain conditions.  As of the v1.30 release, they can be made completely read-only.
"""

Author: Technically, not "since 1.0"
https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/v0.2/pkg/api/v1beta1/types.go#L124

Maybe just s/since 1.0/since the beginning/ ?

Author: Reworded as
```
Read-only volume mounts have been a feature of Kubernetes since the beginning.
Surprisingly, read-only mounts are not completely read-only under certain conditions.
As of the v1.30 release, they can be made completely read-only,
with alpha support for _recursive read-only mounts_.
```

> ### Read-only volume mounts are not really read-only

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Read-only volume mounts were not really read-only
```
?

Reviewer: Bear in mind that people will be reading this after the v1.30 release has happened.

Reviewer 3: Strictly speaking, volumes which are read-only (and not explicitly RRO) *are* still exposed this way.

Author: What about "Read-only volume mounts are not really read-only by default"

Author: Reworded as "Read-only volume mounts are not really read-only by default"

> Volume mounts are widely misunderstood.

Reviewer 3: I don't love this as an intro - it sort of feels like a "gotcha".  Maybe something like:

"""
Volume mounts can be deceptively complicated.
"""

Author: done

> The following manifest is expected to make everything under `/mnt` in the containers read-only:

Reviewer: ````suggestion
You might expect that the  following manifest makes everything under `/mnt` in the containers read-only:
```

Author: done

```yaml
apiVersion: v1
kind: Pod
spec:
  volumes:
    - name: mnt
      hostPath:
        path: /mnt
  containers:
    - volumeMounts:
        - name: mnt
          mountPath: /mnt
          readOnly: true
```

> However, it actually leaves submounts beneath `/mnt` (e.g., NFS or removable media) writable.

Reviewer 3: Maybe add a bit more.  E.g.

"""
However, any sub-mounts beneath `/mnt` may still be writable!  For example, consider that `/mnt/my-nfs-server` is writeable on the host.  Inside the container, writes to `/mnt/*` will be rejected but `/mnt/my-nfs-server/*` will still be writeable.
"""

Author: done

### New mount option: recursiveReadOnly

> Kubernetes 1.30 added a new mount option `recursiveReadOnly` so as to make submounts recursively read-only.

Reviewer 3: Maybe mention that this was a new kernel feature, so it doesn't look like Kubernetes was the cause of the problem ?  :)

Author: mentioned kernel v5.12 in the `mount_setattr` paragraph

The option can be enabled as follows:
```yaml
apiVersion: v1
kind: Pod
spec:
  volumes:
    - name: mnt
      hostPath:
        path: /mnt
  containers:
    - volumeMounts:
        - name: mnt
          mountPath: /mnt
          readOnly: true
          # NEW
          # Possible values are `Enabled`, `IfPossible`, and `Disabled`.
          # Needs to be specified in conjunction with `readOnly: true`.

>           recursiveReadOnly: Enabled

Reviewer: You can use the `highlight` shortcode for emphasis. See https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/administer-cluster/encrypt-data/#cleanup-all-secrets-encrypted (and its source) for an example.

Author: done

```

This is implemented by applying the `MOUNT_ATTR_RDONLY` attribute with the `AT_RECURSIVE` flag
using [`mount_setattr(2)`](https://man7.org/linux/man-pages/man2/mount_setattr.2.html).

> 

Reviewer 3: Maybe also add something like:

"""
For backwards compatibility, the `recursiveReadOnly` field is not a replacement for `readOnly`, but is used _in conjunction_ with it.  To get a properly recursive read-only mount, you must set both fields.
"""

Author: done

> ### Availability

Reviewer: How about:
```suggestion
### Feature availability {#availability}
```

Author: done

To enable `recursiveReadOnly` mounts, the following components have to be used:

* Kubernetes: v1.30 or later, with the `RecursiveReadOnlyMounts`
  [feature gate](/docs/reference/command-line-tools-reference/feature-gates/) enabled.
  As of v1.30, the gate is marked as alpha.

* CRI runtime:
  * containerd: v2.0 or later

* OCI runtime:
  * runc: v1.1 or later
  * crun: v1.8.6 or later

* Linux kernel: v5.12 or later

### What's next?

> The feature gate will be promoted to beta and eventually GA in future releases of Kubernetes
> so that users no longer need to enable the gate.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Kubernetes SIG Node hope - and expect - that the feature will be promoted to beta and eventually
general availability (GA) in future releases of Kubernetes, so that users no longer need to enable
the feature gate manually.
```

You need the “we're hoping” unless SIG Architecture have committed to the graduation to stable.

Author: done

> The default value of `recursiveReadOnly` will still remain `Disabled`, for compatibility sake.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The default value of `recursiveReadOnly` will still remain `Disabled`, for backwards compatibility.
```

Author: done
